In another terminal (or tmux/split window), start GDB and load the kernel symbol file: 
  riscv64-unknown-elf-gdb kernel/kernel / riscv64-unknown-elf-gdb --tui kernel/kernel
TUI means TUI (Text User Interface).

Then connect to QEMU: target remote :26000

The debug mechanism of GDB (GNU Debugger) is based on low-level process control provided 
by the operating system and the symbolic information compiled into your programs. It 
works by intercepting and controlling the execution of a program, reading/modifying 
its memory, and mapping machine instructions back to source code through debug symbols.

Key Components of GDB’s Debugging Mechanism
1. Debugging Symbols (DWARF, stabs)
When you compile a program with the -g flag (e.g., gcc -g), the compiler includes 
debugging information (e.g., variable names, function names, line numbers) in the executable.

GDB reads this symbol table to map machine code addresses to source-level constructs (files, lines, variables).

Without this, GDB can only debug at the raw assembly level.

2. Process Control (ptrace)
On Linux/Unix, GDB uses the ptrace system call to control the execution of another process (or the same program 
started under GDB).

This allows GDB to:
Start/stop the process.
Inspect or modify registers and memory.
Set breakpoints by inserting special trap instructions (INT 3 on x86) into the process’s memory.

3 Breakpoints and Watchpoints
Breakpoints: GDB replaces an instruction at a given address with a software interrupt. When the CPU hits
that instruction, it triggers a trap, and GDB takes control.

Watchpoints: GDB can watch a specific memory address for reads/writes, using either:
  CPU debug registers (hardware watchpoints).
  Software checks (slower).

4. Single Stepping
GDB can single-step through instructions by:
  Using the CPU's single-step mode (if supported).
  Temporarily setting breakpoints at the next instruction(s).

5. Stack Unwinding
GDB uses the current program counter (PC), stack pointer (SP), and frame pointer (FP) to walk through 
stack frames, reconstructing the call chain (for backtrace).

It reads function boundaries and local variable locations from the debug information (e.g., DWARF).

6. Remote Debugging (e.g., QEMU or Embedded Targets)
When debugging a kernel, QEMU, or remote embedded device, GDB communicates via the GDB remote serial protocol (RSP).
Example:
make qemu-gdb launches QEMU in GDB stub mode (-s -S), listening on TCP port :26000.
GDB connects to it with target remote :26000.
All the same ptrace-like operations (breakpoints, memory inspection) are forwarded over TCP.

7. Inspecting and Modifying Memory/Registers
GDB can read/write process memory and registers via:
  ptrace calls for local debugging.
  Remote protocol commands for external targets.
  This allows debugging, patching values, or even modifying program behavior on the fly.

Questions:
1 Looking at the backtrace output, which function called syscall?
usertrap called syscall.

2 What is the value of p->trapframe->a7 and what does that value represent? (Hint: look user/initcode.S, the first user program xv6 starts.)
Is 0x7, 7 means SYS_exec, it is a System call numbers, (#define SYS_exec    7).

3 What was the previous mode that the CPU was in?
The value of sstatus reg is 0x200000022. 
The sstatus register is the Supervisor Status Register.
It holds control and status bits relevant to the supervisor privilege level (S-mode). These bits affect 
interrupt enabling, previous privilege, and memory access behavior.
8	SPP	Supervisor Previous Privilege: 1 = S-mode, 0 = U-mode (used during traps to remember prior mode)

The 8 bit of sstatus reg is 0, so the previous mode that the CPU was is U-mode

Write down the assembly instruction the kernel is panicing at. Which register corresponds to the variable num?
The kernel is panicing at " 80001c1e:	00002683          	lw	a3,0(zero) # 0 <_entry-0x80000000>".

"lw a3, 0" this loads the value from address 0 into register a3.

Why does the kernel crash? Hint: look at figure 3-3 in the text; is address 0 mapped in the kernel address space? 
Is that confirmed by the value in scause above? (See description of scause in RISC-V privileged instructions)
scause=0xd sepc=0x80001c1e stval=0x0
Address 0 is not mapped in the kernel space. Yes.

stval register stands for Supervisor Trap Value Register
(full name: sbadaddr in older specs)

It provides additional information about the cause of a trap, usually the faulting virtual address when 
there's a page fault or access violation.

What is the name of the process that was running when the kernel paniced? What is its process id (pid)?
It is $1 = "initcode\000\000\000\000\000\000\000".
Pid = 2.


